page;text
EN 5;The proposal addresses obstacles stemming from the fact that businesses that want to produce, disseminate and operate AI-enabled products and services across borders are uncertain whether and how existing liability regimes apply to damage caused by AI. This uncertainty concerns particularly Member States where businesses will export to or operate their products and services. In a cross-border context, the law applicable to a non-contractual liability arising out of a tort or delict is by default the law of the country in which the damage occurs. For these businesses, it is essential to know the relevant liability risks and to be able to insure themselves against them.
EN 7;The proposal is based on a staged approach. In the first stage, the objectives are achieved with a minimally invasive approach; the second stage involves re-assessing the need for more stringent or extensive measures.
EN 7;The first stage is limited to the burden-of-proof measures to address the AI-specific problems identified. It builds on the substantive conditions of liability currently existing in national rules, such as causality or fault, but focuses on targeted proof-related measures, ensuring that victims have the same level of protection as in cases not involving AI systems. Moreover, from the various tools available in national law for easing the burden of proof, this proposal has chosen to use rebuttable presumptions as the least interventionist tool. Such presumptions are commonly found in national liability systems, and they balance the interests of claimants and defendants. At the same time they are designed to incentivise compliance with existing duties of care set at Union or national level.
EN 8;The preferred policy option would ensure that victims of AI-enabled products and services (natural persons, businesses and any other public or private entities) are no less protected than victims of traditional technologies. It would increase the level of trust in AI and promote its uptake.
EN 9;Furthermore, it would reduce legal uncertainty and prevent fragmentation, thus helping companies, and most of all SMEs, that want to realise the full potential of the EU single market by rolling out AI-enabled products and services cross-border. The preferred policy option also creates better conditions for insurers to offer coverage of AI-related activities, which is crucial for businesses, especially SMEs to manage their risks.
EN 10;One of the most important functions of civil liability rules is to ensure that victims of damage can claim compensation. By guaranteeing effective compensation, these rules contribute to the protection of the right to an effective remedy and a fair trial (Article 47 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, referred to below as 'the Charter') while also giving potentially liable persons an incentive to prevent damage, in order to avoid liability.
EN 10;With this proposal, the Commission aims to ensure that victims of damage caused by AI have an equivalent level of protection under civil liability rules as victims of damage caused without the involvement of AI. The proposal will enable effective private enforcement of fundamental rights and preserve the right to an effective remedy where AI-specific risks have materialised.
EN 12;Article 1 indicates the subject matter and scope of this Directive: it applies to non-contractual civil law claims for damages caused by an AI system, where such claims are brought under fault-based liability regimes. This means namely regimes that provide for a statutory responsibility to compensate for damage caused intentionally or by a negligent act or omission.
EN 12;This Directive does not apply retroactively, but only to claims for compensation of damages that occur as from the date of its transposition.
EN 13;This Directive aims to provide persons seeking compensation for damage caused by high-risk AI systems with effective means to identify potentially liable persons and relevant evidence for a claim. At the same time, such means serve to exclude falsely identified potential defendants, saving time and costs for the parties involved and reducing the case load for courts.
EN 13;In this respect, Article 3(1) of the Directive provides that a court may order the disclosure of relevant evidence about specific high-risk AI systems that are suspected of having caused damage. Requests for evidence are addressed to the provider of an AI system, a person who is subject to the provider's obligations laid down by Article 24 or Article 28 (1) of the AI Act or a user pursuant to the AI Act. The requests should be supported by facts and evidence sufficient to establish the plausibility of the contemplated claim for damages and the requested evidence should be at the addressees' disposal. Requests cannot be addressed to parties that bear no obligations under the AI Act and therefore have no access to the evidence.
EN 13;According to Article 3(2) the claimant can request the disclosure of evidence from providers or users that are not defendants only in case all proportionate attempts were unsuccessfully made to gather the evidence from the defendant.
EN 13;In order for the judicial means to be effective, Article 3(3) of the Directive provides that a court may also order the preservation of such evidence.
EN 13;As provided in Article 3(4), first subparagraph, the court may order such disclosure, only to the extent necessary to sustain the claim, given that the information could be critical evidence to the injured person's claim in the case of damage that involve AI systems.
EN 13;By limiting the obligation to disclose or preserve to necessary and proportionate evidence, Article 3 (4), first subparagraph, aims to ensure proportionality in disclosing evidence, i.e. to limit the disclosure to the necessary minimum and prevent blanket requests.
EN 13;The second and third subparagraphs of Article 3(4) further aim to strike a balance between the claimant's rights and the need to ensure that such disclosure would be subject to safeguards to protect the legitimate interests of all parties concerned, such as trade secrets or confidential information.
EN 13;In the same context, the fourth subparagraph of Article 3(4) aims to ensure that procedural remedies against the order of disclosure or preservation are at the disposal of the person subject to it.
EN 13;Article 3(5) introduces a presumption of non-compliance with a duty of care. This is a procedural tool, relevant only in cases where it is the actual defendant in a claim for damages who bears the consequences of not complying with a request to disclose or preserve evidence. The defendant will have the right to rebut that presumption. The measure set out in this paragraph aims to promote disclosure but also to expedite court proceedings.
EN 14;With respect to damage caused by AI systems, this Directive aims to provide an effective basis for claiming compensation in connection with the fault consisting in the lack of compliance with a duty of care under Union or national law.
EN 14;It can be challenging for claimants to establish a causal link between such non-compliance and the output produced by the AI system or the failure of the AI system to produce an output that gave rise to the relevant damage. Therefore, a targeted rebuttable presumption of causality has been laid down in Article 4 (1) regarding this causal link. Such presumption is the least burdensome measure to address the need for fair compensation of the victim.
EN 14;The fault of the defendant has to be proven by the claimant according to the applicable Union or national rules. Such fault can be established, for example, for non-compliance with a duty of care pursuant to the AI Act or pursuant to other rules set at Union level, such as those regulating the use of automated monitoring and decision-making for platform work or those regulating the operation of unmanned aircraft. Such fault can also be presumed by the court on the basis of a non-compliance with a court order for disclosure or preservation of evidence under Article 3(5). Still, it is only appropriate to introduce a presumption of causality when it can be considered likely that the given fault has influenced the relevant AI system output or lack thereof, which can be assessed on the basis of the overall circumstances of the case. At the same time, the claimant still has to prove that the AI system (i.e. its output or failure to produce one) gave rise to the damage.
EN 14;Paragraphs (2) and (3) differentiate between, on the one hand, claims brought against the provider of a high-risk AI system or against a person subject to the provider's obligations under the AI Act and, on the other hand, claims brought against the user of such systems. In this respect, it follows the respective provisions and relevant conditions of the AI Act. In the case of claims based on Article 4(2), the defendants' compliance with the obligations listed in that paragraph have to be assessed also in the light of the risk management system and its results, i.e. risk management measures, under the AI Act.
EN 14;In case of high-risk AI systems as defined by the AI Act, Article 4(4) establishes an exception from the presumption of causality, where the defendant demonstrates that sufficient evidence and expertise is reasonably accessible for the claimant to prove the causal link. This possibility can incentivise defendants to comply with their disclosure obligations, with measures set by the AI Act to ensure a high level of transparency of the AI or with documenting and recording requirements.
EN 14;In the case of non-high risk AI systems, Article 4(5) establishes a condition for the applicability of the presumption of causality, whereby the latter is subject to the court determining that it is excessively difficult for the claimant to prove the causal link. Such difficulties are to be assessed in light of the characteristics of certain AI systems, such as autonomy and opacity, which render the explanation of the inner functioning of the AI system very difficult in practice, negatively affecting the ability of the claimant to prove the causal link between the fault of the defendant and the AI output.
EN 14;In cases where the defendant uses the AI system in the course of a personal non-professional activity, Article 4(6) provides that the presumption of causality should only apply if the defendant has materially interfered with the conditions of the operation of the AI system or if the defendant was required and able to determine the conditions of operation of the AI system and failed to do so. This condition is justified by the need to balance the interests of injured persons and non-professional users, by exempting from the application of the presumption of causality the cases in which non-professional users do not add risk through their behaviour.
EN 14;Finally, Article 4(7) provides that the defendant has the right to rebut the causality presumption based on Article 4(1).
EN 14;Such effective civil liability rules have the additional advantage that they give all those involved in activities related to AI systems an additional incentive to respect their obligations regarding their expected conduct.
EN 15;Various national legal systems provide for different strict liability regimes. Elements for such a regime at Union level were also suggested by the European Parliament in its own-initiative resolution of 20 October 2020, consisting of a limited strict liability regime for certain AI-enabled technologies and a facilitated burden of proof under fault-based liability rules. The public consultations also highlighted a preference for such a regime among respondents (except for non-SMEs businesses), whether or not coupled with mandatory insurance.
EN 15;However, the proposal takes into account the differences between national legal traditions and the fact that the kind of products and services equipped with AI systems that could affect the public at large and put at risk important legal rights, such as the right to life, health and property, and therefore could be subject to a strict liability regime, are not yet widely available on the market.
EN 15;A monitoring programme is put in place to provide the Commission with information on incidents involving AI systems. The targeted review will assess whether additional measures would be needed, such as introducing a strict liability regime and/or mandatory insurance